# Noobies guide to darktable 4.2.0

## [darktable ep 124 - Noobies guide to darktable 4.2.0 (pt 1 of 4)](https://youtu.be/ttfZoyVNLsk)

Hello new or potential new dark table user this next series of four videos
will be all about getting you up to speed with dark table 4.2 let's go

Hi and welcome to episode 124 of understanding dark table my name is
Bruce Williams I've been doing this channel for about four years now since 2018 been using dark table since 2016. don't claim to know everything there is to know about dark table but I will do my best to get you up to speed.

I am assuming that you are coming to dark table from some other piece of
software 95 of you are probably coming from Adobe Lightroom in which case dark table is going to look very familiar what I want to do in this next series of videos these newbies guide videos is cover some Concepts rather than process if that makes sense just get you up to
speed with the way dark table is laid
out and how it functions and what it
does differently every piece of software
has its quirks
let's talk about what duct table is and
what dark table isn't
it is as I just mentioned very similar
to Adobe Lightroom it is designed as a
raw development engine
doesn't mean you can't process jpegs of
course you can but it's designed for
working with raw files and it is also a
library management tool so it allows you
to do color ratings star ratings add
keywords all that sort of stuff as well
as give you very advanced search
filtering and sorting tools as well
what it is not
is a
multi-layer or compositing program so
don't think of it like Photoshop or
it is designed for you to work on one
image at a time and whilst we're talking
about one image at a time no you cannot
clone from one image to another image
for that sort of thing like I said you
would need to go to or Affinity
photo or photoshop or something like
that it is also not a destructive image
editor so don't think that you are going
to open up an image create some changes
to that image and then find a save
button which will overwrite the image
file not how it works everything you do
in Dark table is non-destructive it
means it can be undone later
it also means that if you create any
changes to an image and you want to save
that you have to export as a new image
file
all right so let's have a look at the
light table View
in this first video we're just going to
talk about some basic concepts I'm not
going to run through the entirety of
what's in the light table view that will
actually be in the next video
and the final two videos will be in the
dark room which is where you do all of
your image processing but for now let's
talk about the concept of importing
images into dark table
dark table will not
create copies of your images unless you
tell it to so if you use add to library
that assumes that you already have a
folder structure
on your hard drive where your images
live and you simply want dark table
to you know create a thumbnail database
of all of those images so that you can
then view all of those images and decide
which ones you want to process and that
sort of thing
so if you've taken the memory card out
of your camera put it in a USB card
reader and attached it to your laptop or
desktop machine you don't want to use
add to library because
the memory card is not the location you
are going to want to view your images
from all of the time
in that instance you would use copy and
import because that will as it says on
the tin copy the images from where they
are
to some new destination and then import
those into your duct table database so
let's have a look at that in practice I
have deliberately removed a few images
from my catalog so that I can now use
the add to library function to import
them where they are now in the top left
hand corner here we have places these
are different Mount points on your
system they could be hard drives could
be USB thumb drives whatever
in this instance I'm pointing to my
photos Drive
and within that I am pointing to my
family photos folder and then my 2022
folder and I just want to import the
images from the 30th of December as we
can see there's eight or nine images
there and there are three check boxes
across the top select only new images or
new pictures so that's saying to dark
table if I'm pointing to a folder where
some of the images have already been
imported then
only import the new ones makes common
sense right next up recursive directory
if I was pointing to my 2022 folder
within which there are you know 100
other subfolders then recursive
directory says to dark table don't just
look in this parent folder look in any
other folders which might exist within
this folder so you know search deeper
than just this folder and ignore jpeg
images so if yeah I I tend to shoot raw
plus jpeg in camera because I shoot with
the Sony A7 III which has the ability to
Bluetooth the jpegs from the camera to
my phone while I'm out in the field
which is really handy if I want to
quickly you know send something to
social media
so I shoot raw plus jpeg just for that
feature
but when I get home I don't want to
import the jpegs I only want to import
my raw files so I would tick the ignore
jpeg images checkbox as well once you've
done that click on add to library and
dark table has now added those yep nine
images to dark table for me
all right let's look at the copy and
import dialog box as well as you can see
very similar to the add to library
dialog box we've got places up here in
the top left hand corner I've just
grabbed a random memory card out of my
camera bag mounted it in a card reader
to my system it appears as the 32 gig
volume I've got a DCIM folder which is
where my still images are stored we will
just select three files and down here
where it says naming rules we can expand
that with the little arrow there the
base directory naming pattern that is
essentially saying what is the parent
folder into which you want to put these
images I am sending it to my photos
slash test shots folder
we can then create a subdirectory naming
pattern so we're not just putting them
into the test shots folder we can use
all different sorts of variables and
plain text to create a subdirectory
pattern within that parent folder in
this instance I'm using X of year and
then a forward slash to create a child
folder where the child folder is X a few
hyphen X of month hyphen XF day so it'll
end up with you know in this instance
2020-08-30
okay and keep the original file name so
don't rename the files when you import
them
go click on copy and import and
there are the three images that I have
just copied from the memory card to a
folder on my hard drive in the test
shots folder and if we were to go over
and look at that particular folder we
can see
829 there are those three images now I
know what you're thinking
on the copy and import dialog the
metadata suggested that these images
were shot on the 30th but now
or sorry within my folder structure
they've actually been put into a folder
a29 that is due to a Time
synchronization thing that I've got
going on my computer and it's just
something I need to deal with that I
haven't dealt with so don't be too
concerned by that
all right so that is getting images into
dark table
okay now while we are talking about the
folder structure you will notice when
you import files into dark table that
they end up with another file sitting
alongside your original image file and
these files will have the same name with
DOT XMP appended to the end of them
now some people get a little bit
perturbed about these XMP files
cluttering up their file system I would
say one grow to love them because they
contain a lot of information which is
really handy and two they don't take up
a lot of space as you can see they're
only a couple of kilobytes each
excuse my dog panting in the background
what do these files contain well so I've
added train as a keyword to all three of
these images let's go through and we'll
rate that as a one star that is a two
star no not you
you as two stars and you as three stars
and let's go
will make you yellow and we'll make you
red so we've applied some star ratings
and some color ratings no you were meant
to be yellow as well there we go so
these two are yellow rated one star
rated two stars this one's a red color
label and rated three stars
all of that information the keywords the
star ratings the color labels are stored
in the XMP files
and why I love those XMP files is
because if your database ever gets
corrupted
you could lose all of that information
but by having the XMP files with that
information in there
I could even go to a whole new computer
install Dark table copy all of these you
know I can just copy the entire folder
even
onto a new computer with dark table
go add to library and all of that
information comes back and just to prove
that I will remove all of these images
from dark table they're now gone we'll
now go add to library we will import
them again in their current location and
look at that they've still got their
star ratings their color labels and they
all still have the keyword train
attached to them
all right let's have a look at the
preferences the preferences are accessed
via the Cog icon in the upper right hand
corner there that will bring up the
preferences dialog box and you've got a
whole bunch of tabs down the left hand
side that'll allow you to see different
parts of the preferences
something dark table does that I've not
seen in any other software and I
absolutely love is the idea of these
white dots that tells you that that
particular preference has been changed
from the default
I love that idea
so I can immediately see these are the
things I've changed away from the
original default settings
uh we can go through and look at you
know importing
how we work with files in the light
table
things that happen in the dark room
processing defaults
etc etc you get the idea I'm not gonna
dig deep into the preferences because
you can work through them at your own
pace and work out what things you want
to change or don't want to change as you
see fit
now whilst I am going to primarily over
the course of these four videos focus on
the light table View and the dark room
view because that is where you will
spend 95 maybe even more of your time
dark table also offers you a map view
which is really handy you can add images
to points on the map so that should you
at any stage want to say I want to look
at all of my images from Portugal you
know you can zoom in to different parts
of the map and see where images were
locate you know where you were when you
took those images there is also a print
option however it's showing nothing
because my printer is turned off and
sadly for Windows users
as far as I know printing is still not
an option from the windows version of
dark table there's a whole backstory to
that which I won't go into right now
there is a very basic slideshow which
sadly for the new user
how do you get out of it
yeah exactly right there's nothing on
screen to tell you how to get out of the
slideshow
I can press start and it tells me I'm at
the end of my images but it doesn't tell
me how to get out press the Escape key
horrible trap for young players it will
take you back to the light table view
now the slideshow is very basic there
are no options for transitions all you
have is within the preferences the
ability to choose I think it's in
miscellaneous yeah the duration for each
image that is it like I said it is a
very basic slideshow and there is an
option for tethering but the list of
cameras that are supported is quite
limited I would again suggest you do a
Google search on dark table and
tethering and that will show you which
cameras are supported for shooting in a
tethered mode.

## [darktable ep 125 - Noobies guide to darktable 4.2.0 (pt 2 of 4)](https://youtu.be/_dtH0ViJ3Q0)

welcome back new dark table user We are
continuing our newbies guide to dark
table 4.2.0 in this episode we're going
to look at the light table view let's go
[Music]
hi and welcome to episode 125 of
understanding dark table as promised
today we are going to look at the light
table view this is where you do most of
your library management type stuff in
the last episode we covered the import
dialog box so there's no need to revisit
that but what we will do is look at all
of the other modules in the light table
View
first up though there are two buttons
which you will see are common to all of
the modules the one on the left is your
reset button so if you've made any
modifications within a module
you can simply hit that to reset the
module to its default state so if we
were to look at the collections module
by default it will always search film
roles which is what darktable calls a
batch of images when you import them but
let's say I wanted to search by let's
say ISO and maybe I want to find all the
images I've ever shot at 6400 ISO for
example right so there's dark table
filtering all of the images I've ever
shot at 6400. if I want to just get back
to the default for collections I hit the
reset button and we're back to looking
at my default catalog anything you see
with a line through it like this simply
means that those images are no longer in
the location where dark table knew them
to be at the time that it became aware
of those images so either I've deleted
the images or I've moved them somewhere
else using the operating systems file
manager and so dark table no longer
knows where those images are same with
these all right so we can hit reset once
again and we're back to the start the
other button is your preset manager this
will vary from module to module but
essentially most modules will have some
sort of ability to save a preset in the
case of the collections module you can
store a new preset based on whatever
search criteria you've used and finally
on the left hand side we've got the
image information module as the name
suggests this will give you information
about any image that you hover over so
we can see the film role that it was
imported under so 30th of December the
image ID and the group ID have always in
my experience reflected the same number
so I'm not sure what the difference is
between them but I think that's a
reference to the number of the import
into your catalog so you know for me
there's my last image 77 855.
I've got a lot of crap that I really
need to delete off my system
we can then see the file name we can see
the full path so that is the Mount point
on my system and the folder in which
that image lives
whether or not it's a local copy there's
a great video I did on that much earlier
in this series that is still relevant so
go and check out that video on local
copies if that interests you all of the
metadata that you could possibly imagine
if you've put tags they will appear down
there so that is the image information
module now I mentioned that each module
has its own little hamburger menu and
that many of these modules will have
their own preferences so click on
preferences and you will find that
within the
image information module all of these
options can be displayed or hidden so if
you're running on a monitor with limited
resolution and that module is taking up
too much screen real estate vertically
on the left hand side of your monitor
you can come in and uncheck anything
that is just not relevant to you maybe
I'm not worried about export height and
width so I can save that and as you can
see that has now condensed the size of
the image information module over on the
right hand side we have some very handy
modules the first is the select module
as you can see there is a button for
select all that will select all images
within whatever collection of images you
are currently looking at so if it's you
know your entire catalog like this then
the select all button will actually
select every single image that you've
got in your catalog you can select none
you can invert the selection we can
select the film role that they were shot
from or we can select any images which
have not yet been edited very handy next
up the selected images module so you
will notice within this group of images
that there are a bunch of images that
I've marked as Rejects and they are the
ones with the Red X
I deliberately left them in my catalog
for this exact moment in this video so
what I can do now is go up to my filter
for all images
show rejected images only
I could then go select all that will
select just those images and then from
the selected images module I can select
delete and trash and that will
physically delete those files from my
file system do you really wish to
physically delete 67 images yes I do
they are now gone and I'm not seeing
anything because I'm still filtering for
rejected images only I can now go back
to looking at all images
and now I've got the remainder of the
images from my trip and all my rejects
have been deleted uh next up you've got
move which will move the physical asset
to another folder on your system copy
will actually copy any physical asset
and when I say physical asset I mean you
know a raw file a jpegative for PNG
whatever it is it will either move it to
another folder or copy it to another
folder if you've shot a bracketed
sequence with varying exposures you can
create an HDR by selecting the multiple
images and create HDR and that will then
give you the option I think to save it
in either dng or exr format duplicate
will simply create a virtual copy of an
image so that you can do multiple
developments of that image so you might
say I really like this image I want to
do a color version and I want to do a
black and white version so instead of
having to do it once and then undo and
then do the other version you can create
a duplicate and you can have your color
version and your black and white version
side by side on your system but all
you've done is added an extra two
kilobyte file to your system that has
all of the processing steps for each
particular rendition
you can rotate clockwise anti-clockwise
reset the rotation if you've forgotten
what the default orientation was for the
image and then copy locally and resync
local copy as I mentioned earlier I did
a video on that much earlier in this
series feel free to go and watch that
because that is still relevant that is
not something that has changed and then
group if we wanted to say well all of
these were shot in one sequence I want
those to be a group of images I can
click on group you'll notice that they
all get a little thumbnail to say they
are part of a group and the first image
in the group has a slightly different
little icon there
up in the top right hand corner here
you'll see the collapse grouped images
button that will simply hide all of the
others in a stack under that top
thumbnail
and I think there is a keystroke that
will allow you to cycle through the
thumbnails without actually expanding
the group but I can't remember no it's
not the it's not your arrow keys
that is there somewhere if someone
remembers what that is please sing out
in the comments click that again to
expand the group you can then ungroup
next up we've got the history stack this
will allow us to copy and paste
development settings from one image to
another image I'm not going to go into
this in full detail right now you will
probably work it out if you just spend
five minutes playing with the module
next up we've got Styles this is where
you can create a development style based
on
might just be some parameters in one
module it might be parameters that
you've dialed in over a series of
modules so in this instance I've got a
color balance RGB and a diffuse or
sharpen module saved as a preset Now to
create a style you find an image you've
processed you've got some modules in
there that you like and you want to save
that so you click on the create button
that will bring up the modules that we
used for the processing of just that one
image and you might go I really like
what I did with these two graduated
density filters to create a little bit
of a darkening across the top and the
bottom of the image so I'm going to save
that I'm going to call it
horizontal vignette
for one of a better description and you
don't have to give it a description but
I'll go to by graduated if I can learn
to spell density
filters
and save and so now I've got that
horizontal vignette saved as a style I
could come over to an image like this
one here and go horizontal vignette
apply and that has applied that
darkening to that image now it doesn't
look the same because there is other
processing steps on this image that
aren't on that image and so that's why
things look different
but what we have got if we look at this
you'll see the two graduated density
filters doing their thing to darken the
top and the bottom of my frame next up
the metadata editor here you can create
a title and a description for any image
you can also use that across multiple
images if you like if I was to come over
here and call this rainy Airport
and apply you will see in the image
information module title Rainey Airport
within the metadata editor module you do
have some options for different
licensing metadata for Creative Commons
use and as you can see you can store
presets with your own copyright
information if you so desire next up the
tagging module
I did a complete video on this and I
would highly recommend that if you want
the nuts and bolts go and check out that
video but this is where you can add
keywords to any images that you want to
add keywords to I highly recommend
adding keywords to everything but that's
me keywords can either be entered as
individual items or you can enter them
with a hierarchical nature which you can
then choose to display or not display
again not going to go into all of that
right now
geotagging will allow you to do time
offsets I have mentioned in the past you
know if you are shooting a wedding with
another photographer you get home at the
end of the wedding and you import all of
the images and you suddenly realize oh
man my camera is one hour out of sync
with his camera you know maybe we just
went into or out of daylight saving and
one of us hasn't changed the settings on
our camera or whatever you know this
will allow you to create a Time set for
a group of images or a single image if
you need to and finally we have the
export module this will allow you to
take whatever processing you have done
to an image and Export it as a new file
okay next up down the bottom the film
strip this can be turned on and off with
Ctrl F command F if you're on the Mac
that will show you over the course of a
year month by month how many images you
shot that's what this little Skyline
silhouette represents is how many images
were shot in each month now you're
probably thinking well what about prior
to 2008 well I can just use the mouse
wheel of my mouse to scroll the timeline
forward and backwards I can hold down
the control key to zoom in on a
particular year so now I've zoomed in
and I can see you know where I had big
bursts of activity if I want to create a
very quick collection just based on a
Time range I can left click and drag
along this section of the film strip
and that will create a time-based
collection so here it's gone to capture
date and it's included the dates that I
covered when I dragged my mouse now
obviously dragging your mouse along that
timeline is not particular along that
film strip it's not particularly
accurate but it's good enough for rock
and roll just to get you in the ballpark
of what you're looking for next up
assigning color labels if you want to
assign color labels to an image or a
group of images select however many you
want to apply F1 will give you a red
label F2 will give you yellow F3 will
give you green F4 will give you blue F5
will give you purple you can assign
multiple colors to an image you can have
all five colors assigned to all of those
images if that's what you really wanted
don't know why you would do that but you
can likewise to assign star ratings you
would use the keys above your quirky
keys so one for a one star two for two
stars three for three stars you get it
one will set it back to one star and if
you tap the one again that will unrate
those images now there is an option in
the preferences that if you don't like
that behavior you can turn that off so
it won't unrate based on a second tap of
the number one key
if you want to mark an image as a reject
press the r key they will get their
thumbnails grayed out as you can see and
this red X applied in the bottom left of
the thumbnail to signify that they are a
reject if I want to cancel that reject
status I simply go one and one again
next up overlays you'll see that all of
my images here have different bits of
information they have arw for the raw
file type we've got the reject flag
we've got the star ratings we've got
color labels all of that is an overlay
and we can turn those on or off via this
Star menu and you'll see that there is a
bunch of different options there
as for the size of your thumbnails that
is controlled via this slider here so by
default I think it's something like nine
per row I think is the default value
um if you want it to be fewer and larger
icons then you can set that to a lower
number if you want you can crank it all
the way up to 25 thumbnails per row
but obviously as you make your
thumbnails bigger then you have the
ability to see more information down
here at the bottom and you'll notice
that what information gets displayed
here and notice I'm on permanent
extended overlays
will change depending on the size of the
thumbnail so at the moment I'm getting
the file name aperture focal length
exposure ISO as well as star rating and
reject all of that showing up but if I
go to a smaller size I don't see quite
as much that is controlled by a
preference in the light table view here
delimiters for size categories and that
refers to the
size in pixels at which
how much or how little information is
included with each thumbnail so you can
change that value to have when that
amount of metadata displays or does not
display change
all right down here we have click to
enter the film manager layout so here we
are looking at our film manager and it
has a scroll bar on the side so that you
can scroll up and down your collection
we can then go to the zoomable light
table this does not have scroll bars and
you use your control button I'm assuming
that will be the command button on the
Mac and your mouse wheel
and you can now zoom out and you can
left click and drag the you know gray
area to just zoom the light table around
so if you are looking at a massive
collection of images so if I was looking
at my entire collection here I can just
do click and drag to the zoomable light
table I personally prefer the file
manager view next up we have the culling
layout so you've got two different types
of culling mode you've got static which
you can enter with the X key and this
will just simply show you two images at
a time there is also a dynamic uh
culling mode which allows you to see a
whole collection of images so if I was
to go to something like my crocodile
images here
I could select four images and then go
into the dynamic coloring mode and I can
see all four and I could then Mouse
around and decide okay these are all one
star
that's a one star that's a one star and
maybe this one's a three star for
example
and you can see there that the star
ratings have been applied accordingly
if you want to see a full screen preview
you can simply click this icon here or
press the F key and that will give you a
full screen preview of the image and one
final thing that I do want to mention
and this is particularly for people who
shoot in raw something that trips up new
darktable users all the time is that
when you import your images into the
light table
they will inherit the look of the
in-camera jpeg
but the moment you open the raw file in
the dark room View
the in-camera jpeg preview is discarded
and you are simply working with the
Bland old raw file in all its beautiful
blandness and that is not something you
have any control over that is just the
way dark table works the expectation is
that if you are shooting raw and
processing raw you want to start
from
the unprocessed image we will talk about
that more over the next couple of videos
all right I'm going to leave it there
for this episode uh questions comments
feedback sing out down below
and I will catch you in the next one
